Title: Minimal-Intervention KV Retention: A Design-Space Study and a Diversity-Penalty Survivor

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.14292v1

Published Time: Fri, 15 May 2026 00:30:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# Minimal-Intervention KV Retention: A Design-Space Study and a Diversity-Penalty Survivor 

Libo Sun 1 Po-wei Harn 2 Peixiong He 1 Xiao Qin 1

# Abstract 

KV-cache compression at small budgets is a crowded design space spanning cache representa-tion, head-wise routing, compression cadence, de-coding behavior, and within-budget scoring. We study seven mechanisms across these five fam-ilies under matched mean cache on long-form mathematical reasoning (MATH-500 (Hendrycks et al., 2021)) with two distilled-reasoning models (Qwen-7B and Llama-8B variants of DeepSeek-R1-Distill (DeepSeek-AI, 2025)) at budgets b ∈{64 , 128 }. All seven were rejected. We then propose α, a one-function modification to the TriAttention (Mao et al., 2026) retention scorer that replaces argmax-top-k with greedy facility-location-inspired selection under a V-space redun-dancy penalty controlled by a single weight λ. A pre-registered protocol tunes λ on a frozen devel-opment split and confirms on a disjoint held-out split; with λ = 0 .5, α clears Bonferroni on two of the four (model, budget) cells (Qwen b=128 

and Llama b=64 ), no cell is significantly neg-ative, and the pre-registered Branch A triggers. The finding is asymmetric: a minimal scoring modification beat heavier structural redesigns in this regime, and the combined matched-memory, sympy-graded, held-out confirmation protocol is the evidence standard that made the asymmetry visible. 

# 1. Introduction 

The KV cache is the dominant memory cost of long-context language-model inference. At decode time, cached key and value tensors occupy memory linear in sequence length, layers, heads, and head dimension, and grow monotoni-cally with generation. KV-cache compression—selecting a 

> 1

Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA 2Department of Informa-tion Management, National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. Correspondence to: Libo Sun <lzs0101@auburn.edu >.

Preprint. May 15, 2026. 

budget-bounded subset of cached tokens at each compres-sion event (Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Xiao et al., 2024)—trades a small amount of accu-racy for substantial memory savings. Below a threshold, however, compression begins to degrade reasoning accuracy visibly: at small budgets ( b ∈ { 64 , 128 }) on long-form rea-soning workloads, published mechanisms cluster within a few accuracy points of one another, and each proposes a different intervention to push the frontier. This paper asks a narrower question. Holding the model, budget, routing policy, compression cadence, and decod-ing loop fixed, which axis of intervention actually moves accuracy at matched memory? We test seven mechanisms across five families: state (which K/V representations are stored), routing (which heads or layers see which subset of the cache), cadence (when to compress and with what bud-get across decode steps), decoding (how the model emits text given that the cache is being compressed), and scor-ing (which existing tokens are kept under a fixed budget). The seven mechanisms are organized into a retrospective design-space catalogue (Section 3) and were evaluated un-der the methodological standard developed during the study: matched mean cache instrumented during decode, sympy-based grading on MATH-500 (Hendrycks et al., 2021), and 

n ≥ 200 evaluation. We then propose α, a minimal scoring-axis modification, and evaluate it under a pre-registered protocol with a frozen development split for hyperparame-ter selection and a disjoint held-out split for confirmation. The seven catalogue mechanisms were rejected; α survived. Figure 1 sketches the five-axis pipeline and marks where α

sits. 

Contributions. The design-space study (Section 3) cat-alogues seven mechanisms across the five families above, gives a falsified-mechanism verdict for each, and extracts six failure modes that recur across families. α (Section 4) is a one-function modification to the TriAttention (Mao et al., 2026) retention scorer that replaces argmax-top-k

with a greedy facility-location-inspired selector under a V-space redundancy penalty controlled by a single weight λ;at λ = 0 the selector reduces bitwise to top-k. The pre-registered protocol (Section 4.2) is designed against the six failure modes: a frozen MD5-bucketed dev/confirm split, a 1          

> arXiv:2605.14292v1 [cs.LG] 14 May 2026 Minimal-Intervention KV Retention State
> what the cache holds
> Routing
> which heads see what
> Cadence
> when to compress
> Decoding
> what the model emits
> Scoring
> which tokens kept
> control-side
> representation selection selection
> αat λ=0 .5—survived held-out confirmation
> Figure 1. KV-retention pipeline at decode time: the five intervention surfaces examined in this study. State, Routing, and Scoring modify representation and selection over the cache; Cadence and Decoding are control-side interventions sharing a super-bracket. Seven mechanisms across these surfaces were tested under matched-memory evaluation and all rejected; the minimal scoring intervention αat
> λ=0 .5(marked) is the only survivor. Family-by-family verdicts are in Table 1 (Section 3).

λ-probe on the development split alone, and a Bonferroni-corrected joint test on the held-out confirmation split, with the decision rule and branch table committed in code be-fore the confirmation experiment runs. The held-out result (Section 5) is that on MATH-500 with Qwen-7B and Llama-8B variants of DeepSeek-R1-Distill (DeepSeek-AI, 2025) at b ∈ { 64 , 128 }, α clears Bonferroni on two of the four (model, budget) cells with no significantly negative cells and triggers the pre-registered Branch A; a post-confirmation head-to-head against a SnapKV-style windowed-attention baseline (Li et al., 2024) reproduces the same shape. Be-yond the result, the positioning claim (Section 6) is that in this regime a minimal within-axis scoring intervention beat heavier structural redesigns — a property of the design space distinct from the accuracy headline itself. 

Scope. The result is intentionally narrow. Our evaluation covers long-form mathematical reasoning with two distilled-reasoning models in the 7–8B-parameter range. We do not claim transfer to other workloads (LongBench (Bai et al., 2024), code generation, multi-document QA), to larger models, or to non-reasoning models without explicit re-evaluation. The pre-registered protocol covers the method only; the design-space study (Section 3) is retrospective and is presented as such throughout. 

Why this regime is worth isolating. Most published KV-compression methods report accuracy curves at budgets where the baseline retention pipeline already handles the workload well. The pressure point is the smallest budgets that remain coherent at all—where every byte of cache is contested and small intervention surfaces compete for the same accuracy budget. Long-form mathematical reason-ing is particularly demanding at small budgets because (a) chain-of-thought generation (Wei et al., 2022) produces many decode-time steps, so compression triggers fire repeat-edly and per-trigger errors accumulate, and (b) the answer admits closed-form normalization. A sympy-based grader removes the 5–10 pp formatting-noise swings (e.g., 12 vs 

12 , simplification, sign convention) that exact-string graders show at small n and isolates extraction-collapse as a sep-arate failure mode. Sympy grading does not verify the chain of reasoning—only the final answer—but it removes a noise floor that would otherwise dominate small-budget evaluation. Workloads without closed-form ground truth are harder to evaluate at the same level of confidence. 

Roadmap. Section 2 situates the contributions against prior work on KV-cache compression, including the ad-jacent budget-allocation methods PyramidKV (Cai et al., 2024) and Ada-KV (Feng et al., 2025) that occupy the same broader retention/allocation/scoring axis as α from a dif-ferent lever. Section 3 presents the seven negative gates and the family taxonomy, with shared failure modes. Sec-tion 4 defines α and the pre-registered evaluation protocol; Section 5 reports the Phase 1 and Phase 2 results and a post-confirmation head-to-head against a SnapKV-style baseline. Section 6 states the design lesson, its limits, and the open questions, and concludes. 

# 2. Related Work 

We organize prior work along the five axes introduced in Section 1 and conclude with the workload and evaluation methodology that distinguish our protocol from the pub-lished norm. 

Scoring-family compression. The dominant published line of KV-cache compression operates on the scoring axis: given a per-token retention score, retain the top-k.H2O (Zhang et al., 2023) introduces the heavy-hitter hy-pothesis — a small set of attention-heavy tokens carries most of the model’s future predictions and should be pre-served. SnapKV (Li et al., 2024) uses end-of-prefill win-dowed attention to identify which tokens future queries are likely to attend to and then retains those tokens through gen-eration. Scissorhands (Liu et al., 2023) reframes retention selection as a persistence-of-importance test, keeping tokens that score high across multiple recent attention windows. StreamingLLM (Xiao et al., 2024) keeps a small set of initial “attention sink” tokens alongside a recent window, exploiting the empirical observation that early tokens receive dispro-portionate attention mass independent of semantic centrality. 2Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

Quest (Tang et al., 2024) introduces query-aware sparsity, tracking per-page min/max keys and estimating page critical-ity from the current query rather than precomputed statistics. TriAttention (Mao et al., 2026), our internal baseline scorer (“ 1d” throughout), uses precomputed Q/K frequency statis-tics as a proxy for which positions future queries will need. These methods all modify which tokens are kept under a fixed budget; α (Section 4) inherits this scope, adding a sin-gle V-space diversity term and replacing the modular top-k

argmax with a greedy facility-location-inspired selector that conditions each pick on the already-selected set. Closely related, R-KV (Cai et al., 2025) identifies redundancy in K-space for reasoning models; we share the redundancy-as-signal framing but operate in V-space and through the existing retention scorer rather than as a separate stage. The broader family of diverse subset selection via determinantal point processes (Kulesza & Taskar, 2012) offers an alterna-tive formalisation; we use a lighter facility-location heuristic to stay one function away from the existing scorer. 

Budget-allocation compression. A second line of work modifies how a global cache budget is split across the model’s structure. PyramidKV (Cai et al., 2024) allocates KV-cache budget per layer in a pyramidal shape, motivated by the empirical observation that lower layers attend more broadly than upper layers. Ada-KV (Feng et al., 2025) allo-cates budget per attention head adaptively, moving budget toward heads with higher retention need, and is intended to compose with an underlying attention-based scorer (e.g., SnapKV) rather than replace it. These methods are budget allocators, not scoring functions: they operate on the same retention/allocation/scoring axis as α but at a different lever, and are in principle stackable with α as the within-budget scorer; Section 6.3 discusses such compositions. 

Quantization-based compression. Orthogonal to selection-based compression, several methods compress the K and V tensors themselves via quantization: KIVI (Liu et al., 2024) (asymmetric per-channel K and per-token V quantization at 2 bits), KVQuant (Hooper et al., 2024) (non-uniform datatypes with per-channel scales), KV-Tuner (Li et al., 2025) (mixed-precision), MiniKV (Sharma et al., 2024) (rank-based), QAQ (Dong et al., 2024), and ASVD (Yuan et al., 2024). Brandon et al. (Brandon et al., 2024) reduce KV-cache memory by sharing the cache across layers. These directions are complementary to scoring-axis interventions: quantization modifies how each retained slot is represented, while selection modifies which slots are retained. Our negative gate subspace moekv 

(Section 3) is in this family in spirit — per-head V is compressed via a low-rank PCA basis — and was killed under our matched-memory protocol. 

Workload and evaluation methodology. We evaluate on long-form mathematical reasoning generated by distilled-reasoning models (DeepSeek-AI, 2025), which distill from the Llama 3 (Dubey et al., 2024) and Qwen base families and trace their math capability to math-specialized open-model lines such as DeepSeek-Math (Shao et al., 2024); chain-of-thought prompting (Wei et al., 2022) unlocks multi-step reasoning at the cost of substantially longer decode horizons, which is the regime where KV-cache compres-sion matters most. Self-consistency decoding (Wang et al., 2023) would extend the horizon further by sampling mul-tiple chains, magnifying the same KV pressure α targets. The MATH benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2021) and the related word-problem benchmark GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021) provide per-problem closed-form answers that admit sympy-based grading; sympy normalizes equivalent answer forms ( \frac vs. \dfrac , simplification, sign conven-tion), removing the 5–10 pp formatting-noise swings that exact-string graders show at small n without verifying the chain of reasoning itself. At b = 64 , 44 –62 % of incor-rect runs in our evaluation produce no parseable boxed an-swer at all, so an exact-string grader against \boxed {} 

content would conflate that extraction-collapse failure with reasoning failure. Most published KV-compression meth-ods report on LongBench (Bai et al., 2024), RULER (Hsieh et al., 2024), or similar retrieval-style benchmarks rather than long-form generation accuracy. Two methodological choices distinguish our protocol. End-of-prefill memory matching is insufficient when the decode horizon is long: methods that do not recompress during decode use multi-ples of the nominal end-of-prefill budget, so we instrument per-problem peak and mean cache length across the full gen-eration and compare methods at matched mean-cache values. Several of our negative gates were green on end-of-prefill matching and red under mean-cache matching. Separately, the most common protocol reports the same dataset for both method tuning and headline, which — as Bouthillier et al. (Bouthillier et al., 2021) demonstrate for ML bench-marks more broadly — inflates apparent performance; we separate the two via a frozen MD5-bucketed dev/confirm split with the decision rule committed in code before the confirmation experiment runs, and argue pre-registration should be standard in this literature. 

# 3. Design-Space Study: Why Most Mechanisms Failed 

This section is a retrospective design-space study, not a pre-registered sweep. We tested seven mechanisms across the KV-retention pipeline; every structural intervention failed under matched-memory evaluation, and the surviving de-sign is a minimal scoring fix (Section 4). The negatives are what make the survivor interpretable: the contribution is not that one mechanism worked, but that the surviving 3Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

mechanism has the smallest intervention surface and that the failures fall along mechanism-class boundaries rather than implementation-detail boundaries. At each decode step the model holds a key–value cache of length up to some budget B. A KV-retention pipeline must answer five questions, in roughly this order. State asks what the cache holds: per-token K/V tensors by default, with alternatives that compress or replace tensors via PCA bases, span-mean “synthetic” summaries, or low-rank projections. 

Routing asks which heads or layers see which subset of the cache: a single global policy by default, with alternatives that admit per-head or per-layer choices among multiple scoring strategies. Cadence asks when compression is trig-gered and with what budget across decode steps: a fixed budget at every trigger by default, with alternatives that mod-ulate budget by step index. Decoding asks what the model emits while the cache is being compressed: unmodified gen-eration by default, with alternatives that prompt for dense an-chor tokens the eviction scorer can pin. Scoring asks which tokens are kept under fixed budget, routing, cadence, and decoding behavior: this is where attention-based heuristics (TriAttention (Mao et al., 2026), SnapKV (Li et al., 2024), H2O (Zhang et al., 2023)) and our α regularizer live. The five families fall along three axes: state modifies the repre-sentation of cached entries, routing and scoring modify the 

selection over cached entries, and cadence and decoding are control-side — they modify when to compress and what the model emits without changing what the cache holds at any given moment. Figure 1 (page 2) shows the five surfaces with cadence and decoding under a shared “control-side” super-bracket; in the verdict table below they are tracked separately because they were independent hypotheses with independent kills. 

3.1. Verdict Table 

Table 1 summarizes every mechanism we tested, organized by family. Each row corresponds to a single catalog gate, documented in the negative-results catalog distributed with this paper. The synthetic-memory state family explored four sub-attempts before we closed it at family level; for table compactness those four are reported as a single row with a footnote pointer. The coverage is asymmetric, and we flag it. Across the four structural families we ran five catalog mechanisms (and roughly ten sub-attempts once the synthetic-memory fam-ily is itemized), against three scoring-family mechanisms (variant-B V-direction prior, reasoning-statistics recalibra-tion, and α). Scoring received the same or more design effort per mechanism; the family is narrower because, once budget, routing, cadence, and decoding are fixed, the re-maining design surface is the score function itself, which admits fewer qualitatively distinct interventions than the structural surfaces it sits on top of. Section 3.3 makes this argument precise. 

3.2. Shared Failure Modes 

The kill verdicts in Table 1 are not independent. Six failure modes recur across families and account for every negative we report. 

Iso-cache underperformance. Once mean cache length is matched at decode time — not just at end of prefill — structural mechanisms sit below the linear interpolation be-tween fixed-budget reference points. End-of-prefill match-ing is not matched memory; mechanisms that do not re-compress during decode can silently use 5 × more cache than their reported budget would suggest. We require per-problem peak/mean cache instrumentation as a gate-passing condition. 

n = 50 to n = 200 magnitude evaporation. Headline deltas at n = 50 on MATH-500 routinely shrank substan-tially at n = 200 . An early α-line measurement at n = 50 

on Qwen-7B reported a mean lift of +5 .6 pp at aggressive budgets; the same mechanism re-evaluated at n = 200 

on two models shrank to between +0 .2 and +0 .5 pp. The reasoning-statistics gate showed a related instability across 

budgets at fixed n = 50 (+6 pp at b = 128 , −2 pp at 

b = 64 ), illustrating that small-n headline deltas can also be sign-inconsistent. Any gate decision based on n = 50 

is treated as a screening signal only; confirmation requires 

n ≥ 200 .

b=64 extraction collapse. At budgets near 64 on long-form math reasoning, 44–62 % of incorrect runs fail with 

extracted answer = None : the model cannot pro-duce a parseable boxed answer, regardless of reasoning quality. Aggressive-budget evaluation at b=64 partly tests structured-output fluency, not retention quality. We report 

b=64 alongside b=128 to keep both signals visible. 

Proxy-to-runtime drift. Pre-RoPE Q/K attention surro-gates, oracle-keep capture rates, and mean-V cosine simi-larities all failed to predict matched-memory task accuracy. The variant-B, subspace-moeKV, and static-route gates were each green on a proxy metric and red at runtime. We treat any proxy-only result as a screening signal; runtime accu-racy on the matched-memory protocol is the decision rule. 

Cross-model transfer failure. Interventions calibrated on Qwen-7B did not always survive transfer to Llama-8B at n ≥ 200 . The α-only mechanism at λ=1 (an earlier checkpoint on the path to the Branch-A result) produced a Qwen-7B lift around +1 .7 pp at p ≈ 0.05 on the b = 128 

cell while leaving the Llama-8B b = 64 cell statistically 4Minimal-Intervention KV Retention Family Gate Hypothesis (one line) Change type Verdict Failure mode 

State subspace Per-head V has low intrin-sic dimensionality; rank-32 PCA preserves quality at 

∼1.6 × memory savings. V tensors → per-head low-rank PCA basis Killed Proxy–runtime drift 

syn mem † Span-mean “synthetic states” plus a log( N ) mass bias compress old tokens better than per-token retention at extreme budgets. KV cache → mean-pooled synthetic slots Killed Family bun-dle (4 sub-attempts) Routing static route A static per-head choice be-tween uniform and attention scoring, calibrated offline, beats either single policy. Routing → calibrated per-head policy Killed Proxy–runtime drift Cadence schedule Round-indexed budget schedules allocate more cache to high-risk reasoning stretches at matched mean cache. Budget →

step down /

step up 

Killed Phase-independent class kill Decoding state emit Prompting for compact “State:” anchor lines gives the eviction scorer dense pinnable tokens. Decoding → com-pact state-line emis-sion Killed Anchors crowd out reasoning Scoring 

variant b A V-space “task-relevance” direction (mean-V cosine prior) adds retention signal beyond attention-only scor-ing. Score + = λ ·

cos( V, dir )

Killed Proxy–runtime drift 

Q stats TriAttention’s Q/K fre-quency statistics, recali-brated on math-reasoning traces, improve 1d compres-sion at aggressive budgets. Score → reasoning-recalibrated stats Killed Sign-inconsistent, 

n-evaporation 

α (λ=0 .5) A diversity regularizer (cosine-against-retained) prevents redundant retention at small budgets. Score + = λ· diver-sity penalty 

Survived n/a 

Table 1. Verdict summary across mechanism families. The bottom row, shaded, is the surviving mechanism examined in detail in Sections 4–5. † The synthetic-memory state family closed at family level after four consecutive sub-attempts (span-mean prefill states, bounded variant, and two static/dynamic sel hybrid formulations). All four failed iso-cache evaluation; we report them as a single family-level kill in the table and itemize them in the catalog. 

null ( p = 0 .92 ); only after re-tuning λ to 0.5 on a held-out dev split did Llama recover a Bonferroni-significant lift. Several other gates evaluated on Qwen alone (e.g., reasoning-statistics recalibration) provide no Llama-side evidence either way, which is itself a transfer-failure mode in our protocol: a single-model gate is not gate-passing. We require Qwen + Llama in any gate-passing evaluation; single-model wins are explicitly flagged as such. 

Family-level bundling. A single sub-attempt’s failure is not a class kill; the synthetic-memory state family was re-jected only after four consecutive sub-attempts (span-mean prefill, bounded re-gate, static and dynamic sel hybrid )all failed iso-cache. The family kill is load-bearing: it is what licenses “state-side rewrites do not survive matched-memory evaluation,” rather than “this particular state-side rewrite did not survive.” These six modes are the methodological backbone of the evaluation in Sections 4–5. The protocol was designed around these risks: a frozen dev/confirm split (against n-evaporation and threshold chasing); evaluation on both Qwen-7B and Llama-8B (against single-model wins); per-problem mean cache instrumented during decode (against iso-cache failures); runtime accuracy as the decision vari-able rather than any proxy metric (against proxy-runtime drift); and a Bonferroni-corrected joint test across the four (model, budget) cells (against per-cell multiple-comparison artifacts). 5Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

3.3. Why Minimal Scoring Survived: Preview, with Caveats 

The pattern in Table 1 is the design-space claim: the sole survivor is the mechanism with the smallest intervention surface. Structural mechanisms change what the cache con-tains, what routes to it, when it is compressed, or what gets generated — each family adds degrees of freedom that have to be paid for in retention quality at matched memory, and the payments were not recovered. The α regularizer (Sec-tion 4) operates on the same K/V tensors, routing, budget schedule, and generated text as the baseline, adding a single diversity term to the existing 1d score; at λ = 0 it is a bit-wise no-op against the baseline. The intervention surface is the lowest-dimensional one available in the pipeline. Sec-tion 6.1 states the resulting design lesson; Section 5 provides the matched-memory evidence under the pre-registered pro-tocol. 

Sequential, not factorial. The seven gates in Table 1 were sequential hypothesis tests with shifting motivations, not a pre-designed factorial sweep across the family taxonomy. The taxonomy is the contribution of this section; the chronol-ogy is a fact about how we arrived at it. The catalog dis-tributed with this paper records the full timeline. 

Pre-registration scope. The pre-registered protocol ap-plies to α (Sections 4–5), not to the negative gates that pre-date it. Section 3 is retrospective; the strength of the design-space claim rests on the confirmation in Section 5, not on the negatives alone. 

# 4. α: Method and Protocol 

This section defines α and the pre-registered protocol used to evaluate it. α is a one-function modification to the TriAt-tention 1d retention scorer (Mao et al., 2026) that replaces argmax-top-k with greedy facility-location-inspired selec-tion under a V-space redundancy penalty. The companion protocol (Section 4.2) is designed against the failure modes catalogued in Section 3: a frozen 201 -problem development split for λ tuning and a disjoint 299 -problem held-out split for confirmation, with three seeds, cluster bootstrap, and a Bonferroni-corrected joint test across four (model, budget) cells. Section 5 reports Phase 1 and Phase 2 results and reads the verdict against a pre-committed branch table. 

4.1. Method: A V-Space Diversity Penalty 

Let s ∈ Rn be the per-token retention scores produced by the TriAttention 1d scorer at a compression event, where n is the current cache length and k ≤ n is the post-compression budget. The baseline retention rule is modular top-k: keep the indices in arg max k s. We replace this with a greedy facility-location-style selector under a V-space redundancy penalty. For each token i, define a V-signature vi ∈ Rd by averaging the value tensor across layers and across attention heads and unit-normalizing: 

vi = 1

∥ui∥2 + ε ui, ui = 1

LH 

> L

X

> ℓ=1
> H

X

> h=1

V (ℓ,h ) 

> i

, (1) where V (ℓ,h ) 

> i

∈ Rdhead is the value vector for token i at layer 

ℓ, head h, and L, H are the layer and head counts. Cosine similarity between two unit-normalized signatures reduces to a dot product: cos( vi, v j ) = v⊤ 

> i

vj .Given an already-selected subset St of size t, the marginal gain of adding candidate token i / ∈ St is 

∆( i | St) = si − λ max 



0, max 

> j∈St

cos( vi, v j )



. (2) The outer max(0 , ·) floor reflects an implementation choice: candidates anti-aligned with the selected set should not re-ceive a negative redundancy penalty (i.e., a bonus). A token whose V-signature is roughly orthogonal to or anti-aligned with St is treated as having zero redundancy with it. The budget is filled greedily: 

it+1 = arg max 

> i / ∈St

∆( i | St), t = 1 , . . . , k − 1. (3) The first pick i1 = arg max i si is the modular argmax (matching the baseline). At λ = 0 the selector reduces exactly to top-k; this is enforced by an explicit fast path so that λ = 0 is a bitwise no-op against the TriAttention (Mao et al., 2026) baseline. Algorithm 1 summarizes the selector. Equation 3 is a facility-location-inspired greedy selec-tor (Krause & Golovin, 2014): each pick balances the per-token base score against a redundancy term against the already-selected set. Compared to the modular arg max k s

baseline, the per-step decision now depends on the current selection, breaking the indices-are-independent property of top-k. Our objective is not in general submodular, so we do not claim the (1 − 1/e )-style approximation guarantee for greedy submodular maximization (Nemhauser et al., 1978); the empirical value of the selector is established by the held-out evaluation in Section 5.2. The modification is intentionally minimal: the baseline K and V tensors, routing, budget schedule, and decoding pro-cedure are all unchanged, and only the k-element selection step inside the existing 1d scorer is modified. The hyper-parameter λ controls the strength of the diversity penalty and is tuned in Phase 1. Algorithm 1 computes an n × n

cosine matrix once per compression event and then runs 

k − 1 greedy picks with constant-time marginal-gain up-dates, an O(n2d + nk ) step over the candidate pool of size 6Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

Algorithm 1 α retention selection (one compression event). 

Require: base scores s ∈ Rn, V-signatures V ∈ Rn×d

with rows unit-normalized, budget k, regularization 

λ ≥ 0. 

> 1:

if λ = 0 then  

> 2:

return indices of top-k(s) (top-k fast path)  

> 3:

end if  

> 4:

Sims ← V V ⊤ // n × n cosine matrix  

> 5:

S ← ∅; m ← 0n // mi =max  0, max j∈S cos( vi, v j ) 

> 6:

i1 ← arg max i si; S ← S ∪ { i1}; m ←

max( m, Sims [i1, :])  

> 7:

for t = 1 , . . . , k − 1 do  

> 8:

a ← s − λm ; a[S] ← −∞  

> 9:

i ← arg max j aj 

> 10:

S ← S ∪ { i}; m ← max( m, Sims [i, :])  

> 11:

end for  

> 12:

return sort (S)

n; at b ∈ { 64 , 128 } this overhead is negligible against the rest of decode in our matched-memory harness, and we did not specifically optimize it. 

4.2. Pre-registered Protocol 

Section 3.2 listed six failure modes that an honest evaluation in this setting has to defend against. Our protocol addresses each of them explicitly and was registered in code before Phase 2 ran. 

Frozen dev/confirm split. We hash each MATH-500 (Hendrycks et al., 2021) problem’s unique id with MD5, bucket by ( md5 mod 5 ), and assign buckets {0, 1}

to a 201-problem development split and buckets {2, 3, 4}

to a 299-problem held-out confirmation split. The split is deterministic and committed in code before Phase 1; it is not recomputed after Phase 1 results are observed. 

Phase 1 (λ-probe; dev split only). Phase 1 is alightweight λ-selection screen, not a full factorial: we sweep λ ∈ { 0.5, 1.0, 1.5} across two models (DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-7B, DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-8B) and two budgets ( b ∈ { 64 , 128 }) at a single seed, on the 201-problem dev split only. The λ = 1 .0 point reuses an existing gate (Section 5.1); the λ ∈ { 0.5, 1.5} points required eight new evaluations. The λ = 1 .5 arm is incomplete on three of four cells (Section 5.1 and Table 2 report the exact per-cell 

n); we disclose the gap, verify the ranking is robust to it, and rely on Phase 2 to carry the central claim. The decision rule is fixed in advance: pick the λ that maximizes the mean of ∆(1 ddiv − 1d) across the four (model, budget) cells. Ties within ±0.5 pp are broken toward the smaller λ (Occam). 

Phase 2 (confirmation; confirm split only). The winning 

λ from Phase 1 is evaluated on the 299-problem confirm split with three seeds per cell, two models, two budgets — twelve cells total, all sympy-regraded. The 1d baseline is reused from the prior gate (subsetted to the confirm IDs; no new compute). We report per-cell paired deltas with cluster bootstrap on per-problem accuracy differences ( nboot =10 ,000 ). 

Decision rule. The four (model, budget) cells form a Bon-ferroni family. Per-cell significance uses α = 0 .05 ; joint significance after Bonferroni correction uses α = 0 .05 /4 = 0.0125 . Branch decisions were pre-committed before un-blinding, mutually exclusive. Branch A (full design-lesson paper) requires at least one Qwen cell with ∆ > 0 at per-cell p < 0.05 , a positive Llama mean ∆ across cells, and no significantly negative Llama cell. Branch B (workshop framing) satisfies the Qwen condition but fails one of the two Llama conditions. Branch C (no central α claim) has no qualifying Qwen cell. 

# 5. Confirmation Results 

This section reports Phase 1 and Phase 2 results for α under the protocol of Section 4.2, reads the verdict against the pre-committed branch table, accounts for the two non-significant cells, and runs a post-confirmation head-to-head against a SnapKV-style windowed-attention baseline on the same held-out split. 

5.1. Phase 1: λ-Probe on the Development Split 

Table 2 reports per-cell accuracy on the development split for each λ in the probe grid, against the 1d baseline. The 

λ = 1 .0 column reuses a prior gate’s outputs subsetted to the dev IDs; the λ ∈ { 0.5, 1.5} columns are new dev-split evaluations. The aggregate row averages ∆(1 ddiv − 1d)

across the four cells. By the pre-registered rule, λ = 0 .5 wins. The λ = 1 .5

cells are short on three of four because the probe sweep manifest combined λ ∈ { 0.5, 1.5} outputs into a single file per (model, budget); a per-row λ filter recovers each arm cleanly, and the λ=0 .5 > λ =1 .5 > λ =1 .0 ranking is unchanged if the short cells are excluded. 

5.2. Phase 2: Held-Out Confirmation 

Phase 2 evaluates 1ddiv at λ = 0 .5 against 1d on the held-out confirm split, with three seeds per cell. Table 3 and Figure 2 (a) report per-problem cluster-bootstrap estimates of ∆(1 ddiv − 1d) with two-sided p-values and 95 % CIs. 

Why λ = 0 .5 outperformed λ = 1 .0. The precursor gate that motivated this paper evaluated 1ddiv at λ = 1 .0. Subset-7Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

Model b 1d (n) ∆λ=0 .5 ∆λ=1 .0 ∆λ=1 .5

Qwen-7B 64 8.0 % (201) +0 .5 (201) −1.0 (201) +2 .5 (200) Qwen-7B 128 15.4 % (201) +4 .0 (201) +1 .0 (201) +1 .0 (164) Llama-8B 64 7.5 % (201) +0 .0 (201) +0 .0 (201) −1.9 (196) Llama-8B 128 16.9 % (201) −1.5 (201) −2.0 (201) +0 .0 (201) 

Mean ∆ across 4 cells +0 .75 −0.50 +0 .43 

Table 2. Phase 1 λ-probe on the development split. Cells report ∆(1 ddiv − 1d) in percentage points; parenthetical n is the number of development problems present at that cell (several λ=1 .5 cells are short due to an incomplete sweep slot). λ = 0 .5 wins by mean ∆ and is also the smaller of {0.5, 1.5} within the ±0.5 pp tie tolerance, so the Occam tie-break selects the same value. Qwen-7B, b = 64                                    

> Qwen-7B, b= 128
> Llama-8B, b= 64
> Llama-8B, b= 128
> −2 0246810 12
> Δaccuracy (pp)
> +1.56 (p=0.2020)
> +4.79 * * (p=0.0024)
> +2.23 * * (p=0.0052)
> −0.22 (p=0.8616)
> (a) Δ(1 ddiv (λ= 0.5) − 1 d)
> −2 0246810 12
> Δaccuracy (pp)
> +4.46 * * (p=0.0034)
> +8.25 * * (p=<10 −4 )
> +2.45 (p=0.0934)
> +0.56 (p=0.7638)
> (b) Δ(1 ddiv (λ= 0.5) − SnapKV-style)

Figure 2. Side-by-side forest plots of two α-vs-baseline contrasts on the same held-out confirm split. Three seeds, two-sided cluster bootstrap ( nboot = 10 ,000 ), Bonferroni-corrected jointly over the four (model, budget) cells ( α = 0 .0125 , marked ** ). Panel (a) :

∆(1 ddiv (λ=0 .5) − 1d) — the pre-registered Phase 2 confirmation. Panel (b) : ∆(1 ddiv (λ=0 .5) − SnapKV-style ) — the post-confirmation head-to-head. Filled brick diamonds with shaded row tints mark Bonferroni-pass cells; open gray circles mark non-significant ones; inline annotations show the ∆ point estimate (pp) and two-sided p.

ted to the same confirm IDs, that arm produced a per-cell Bonferroni-pass on Qwen b=128 (+3 .23 pp, p = 0 .0076 )but a null on Llama b=64 (+0 .67 pp, p = 0 .45 ). At λ = 0 .5

on the same IDs (Table 3), the Qwen cell strengthens and the Llama cell flips to Bonferroni-pass. Smaller regularization is strictly better on both formerly-positive and formerly-null cells under the same problems and the same models. We read this as evidence that the prior intuition (“more di-versity penalty = better retention”) was incorrect at this magnitude: at λ = 1 the discount on attention-driven con-tent exceeded the gain from de-duplicating the kept set, so the base attention score must dominate the ranking except where two attention-equivalent candidates are V-redundant. The dev/confirm split is what entitles the claim: λ = 0 .5

was selected on the disjoint dev split by the pre-registered aggregate decision rule, not on held-out confirm. 

Branch readout. The pre-committed branch decision reads directly from Table 3. Qwen has a Bonferroni-passing cell at b=128 , the Llama mean ∆ across cells is +1 .00 pp (positive), and the Llama b=128 null ( p = 0 .86 ) is well within the null region rather than significantly negative. All three Branch-A conditions hold; Branch A triggers. 

5.3. Honest Negatives 

Two cells in Table 3 did not clear per-cell significance and we report them as such. Qwen b=64 (∆ = +1 .56 pp, p =0.20 ) is positive in direction and in sign-agreement with the other three cells, but its 95 % CI contains zero; the underlying baseline accuracy is only ∼ 8% and roughly half of the failures at b=64 are extraction-collapse rather than reasoning quality (Section 3.2), so the effective signal is small. Llama b=128 (∆ = −0.22 pp, p = 0 .86 ) is the one robust null: at the highest baseline accuracy of the four cells, the diversity penalty produces no measurable change, and the cell was also null at the prior λ = 1 checkpoint on the same problems, so the null is consistent across two λ values rather than a one-shot fluctuation. We do not propose a mechanism for this null and the protocol does not support a post-hoc explanation. The honest framing is that α produces positive point estimates at three of four cells, of which two clear the joint Bonferroni threshold. 8Minimal-Intervention KV Retention                                   

> Model b∆(pp) 95 % CI pBonferroni qwen7b 64 +1 .56 [−0.89 ,+4 .01] 0.20 —
> qwen7b 128 +4 .79 [+1 .67 ,+7 .92] 0.0022 PASS llama8b 64 +2 .23 [+0 .56 ,+3 .90] 0.0054 PASS
> llama8b 128 −0.22 [−2.45 ,+2 .01] 0.86 —
> Table 3. Phase 2 confirmation on the held-out split. Per-cell paired delta with cluster bootstrap on per-problem accuracy differences (nboot = 10 ,000 ). Joint Bonferroni threshold α= 0 .0125 . Two of four cells clear Bonferroni; no cell has a significantly negative effect.

5.4. Head-to-Head: α vs SnapKV-Style Baseline 

The pre-registered protocol of Section 4.2 compared α

against the internal TriAttention 1d baseline. We run a post-confirmation head-to-head against a SnapKV-style windowed-attention retention family (Li et al., 2024) on the same confirm split, three seeds, and four cells. The com-parator is implemented inside our matched-memory harness under the method tag snapkv with window ; we do not claim exact parity with the official SnapKV implementa-tion. This analysis is outside the branch decision rule and tests whether α’s gains survive comparison to a same-lever published scoring family. 

Main contrast: ∆(1 ddiv − SnapKV-style ). Figure 2 (b) reports per-cell deltas under the same protocol used for the internal contrast (Section 5.2). All four cells are positive in point estimate; both Qwen cells clear the joint Bonferroni threshold, and the mean ∆ across cells is +3 .93 pp. The Llama point estimates are positive but underpowered against the SnapKV-style baseline: b=64 at +2 .45 pp with p =0.09 , and b=128 at +0 .56 pp with p = 0 .76 .

Auxiliary contrast: ∆(1 d − SnapKV-style ). The main contrast tests our method against the SnapKV-style baseline, but its interpretation depends on whether the internal 1d

baseline itself is competitive. We therefore report a second contrast, ∆(1 d − SnapKV-style ), as supporting evidence, without Bonferroni correction. At Qwen b=128 , the in-ternal 1d is +3 .46 pp above the SnapKV-style baseline at uncorrected p = 0 .048 ; at Qwen b=64 it is +2 .90 pp with 

p = 0 .058 . On Llama the two methods are within ±0.78 pp at p > 0.6. The auxiliary contrast is consistent with the in-ternal 1d baseline being competitive with the SnapKV-style implementation in our protocol, so α’s additional lift on top of 1d in Section 5.2 does not sit on top of an artificially weak floor. We do not draw a stronger conclusion from the auxiliary contrast given its uncorrected p values. 

Reading. The Qwen-vs-Llama asymmetry observed in Phase 2 recurs against a baseline of a different mechanism class, so the heterogeneity is more plausibly a property of the (model , b ) point itself than of α’s relationship to the internal 1d baseline. 

# 6. Design Lesson and Conclusion 

We synthesize the empirical pattern from Sections 3–5 into a forward-looking design lesson, separate what we expect to generalize from what we do not, list the open questions, and conclude. 

6.1. The Lesson, Stated 

In the small-budget KV-retention regime we study, the mini-mal scoring-function intervention survived where heavier structural redesigns did not. The surviving mechanism ( α,Section 4) preserves the K and V tensors, the routing pol-icy, the budget cadence, and the decoding behavior of the baseline, modifying only the k-element selection step inside the eviction scorer with a single V-space redundancy term and one tunable weight. The seven negative-gate mecha-nisms catalogued in Section 3 — five structural attempts across state ( ×2), routing, cadence, and decoding, together with two earlier scoring-family attempts (a V-direction prior and a reasoning-statistics recalibration) — each added de-grees of freedom to the pipeline and each failed to recover the cost in retention quality at matched memory. α is the third scoring-family attempt and the only mechanism that survived. At the small budgets and long-form math-reasoning work-load we tested, the baseline retention pipeline already does most of the work, so a structural intervention must outper-form a strong default rather than fill an empty slot. The evaluation protocol (matched mean cache, sympy-regraded MATH-500 at n ≥ 200 on two distilled-reasoning mod-els, pre-registered dev/confirm split, Bonferroni-corrected joint test) is the evidence standard that made this asymmetry visible: the seven kills and the surviving Branch-A result would not be visible under the more common end-of-prefill, 

n = 50 , single-model protocol. Section 6.2 unpacks which parts of this reading we expect to generalize. 

6.2. What Generalizes 

Three takeaways are supported by direct evidence. 

Match memory across the decode horizon, not at end of prefill. The single largest source of false-positive results in our design-space study was end-of-prefill memory match-9Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

ing. Several gates—most prominently the synthetic-memory family—were green on end-of-prefill cache equality and sat 5–12 pp below their fixed-budget reference once mean cache was instrumented over the full generation. We recommend per-problem mean cache (and ideally peak cache) instru-mentation as a gate-passing condition for any KV-retention claim, and report ours alongside accuracy in every table. This is methodological—not specific to α—and we expect it to generalize. 

n = 50 is a screening signal; confirmation requires n ≥

200 . Headline deltas at n = 50 on MATH-500 routinely shrank or sign-flipped at n = 200 . The α direction itself looked like a +5 .6 pp lift at n = 50 and shrank to +0 .2

to +0 .5 pp at n = 200 . The gates that escaped with n =50 headlines (reasoning-stat recalibration showed +6 pp at 

b = 128 and −2 pp at b = 64 on the same dataset and seed) were sign-inconsistent across budgets, which is itself a tell. The matched-memory + sympy-regrade + n ≥ 200 +Qwen + Llama quadruple is what surfaced the seven kills; we believe it is roughly the minimum bar for trustworthy retention claims at the budgets we study. 

The retention/allocation/scoring axis is the productive de-sign surface in this regime. We tested four structural axes (state, routing, cadence, decoding) with five mechanism implementations, against three scoring-axis mechanisms (variant-B V-direction prior, reasoning-stat recalibration, α). The single survivor is on the scoring axis. Adjacent pub-lished work — PyramidKV (Cai et al., 2024) for per-layer budget allocation, Ada-KV (Feng et al., 2025) for per-head adaptive budget allocation — operates on the same broader retention/allocation/scoring axis from a different lever (al-location, not scoring). The qualitative pattern from our internal evidence is consistent with “the scoring/allocation axis is where the active progress in KV-cache compression has been”; we do not provide head-to-head reproduction of these adjacent methods under our matched-memory proto-col in this paper, and treat such reproductions as future work (Section 6.3). 

6.3. Scope and Open Questions 

The Branch-A confirmation is intentionally narrow. We separate what the protocol entitles us to claim from what is open. 

Workload. The evaluation is on long-form mathemati-cal reasoning with MATH-500 and DeepSeek-R1-Distill chain-of-thought generations. The matched-memory pro-tocol carries to other workloads in principle, but the spe-cific magnitude and Bonferroni-pass-rate we report on this workload does not constitute evidence about LongBench, multi-document QA, code generation, or other downstream regimes; the method has not been re-tested outside MATH-500. 

Model scale and family. We evaluated two distilled-reasoning models in the 7–8B-parameter range. The cell-level heterogeneity we observe (saturation at the larger bud-get on Llama; smaller-but-positive direction on Qwen b=64 )is a within-this-pair observation. We do not claim transfer to non-reasoning models, larger models (70B+), or instruct-tuned models without explicit re-evaluation. 

Hyperparameter range. λ = 0.5 was selected on a 

{0.5, 1.0, 1.5} probe grid; we do not claim it is the global optimum. The lesson from our λ refinement is qualitative (light regularization beat heavy), not numerical. A finer probe grid is reasonable future work; the pre-registration boundary in this paper covers the discrete grid we ran. 

Composition with budget-allocation methods. α is a within-budget scoring function; PyramidKV and Ada-KV are budget allocators that compose with an underlying scorer. A natural stack places our scorer inside either Ada-KV’s per-head budget or PyramidKV’s per-layer split. Our protocol can evaluate any such composition. 

λ schedules and signature variants. We treat λ as con-stant across decode steps; whether a schedule (heavier penalty early in decode, lighter later, or the reverse) recovers additional lift is open. The α V-signature is the simplest possible aggregation — a unit-normalized average of V

across all layers and heads; per-head, per-layer, or learned linear projections were not evaluated. Tooling for both is already present ( diversity-signature-mode ); the experiments were deferred to keep the pre-registration scope tight. 

Code and data availability. A standalone reference im-plementation of the α selector and the V-signature ag-gregator (Algorithm 1 and Eqs. 1–3), the pre-registered MD5-bucketed dev/confirm split, the raw per-problem outputs from every cell in Sections 5 and 5.4, and the analysis scripts that produced the tables, figures, and bootstrap intervals are available at https://github. com/libophd/minimal-kv-retention . The full matched-memory runtime harness and the TriAttention in-tegration (Mao et al., 2026) are being prepared for release ahead of the venue submission. 

Conclusion. We tested seven mechanism interventions across state, routing, cadence, decoding, and scoring at small budgets on long-form mathematical reasoning under a matched-mean-cache protocol. None survived; α — a one-function diversity penalty on the TriAttention 1d (Mao et al., 2026) scorer with a top-k fast path at λ = 0 — did, 10 Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

clearing Bonferroni on two of the four (model, budget) cells under a pre-registered dev/confirm split and triggering the pre-committed Branch A. Whether minimal-surface in-terventions remain Pareto-dominant outside this regime — across workloads, models, and budgets — is open; we ex-pect the protocol that surfaced the asymmetry to carry over more readily than the specific finding. 

# References 

Bai, Y., Lv, X., Zhang, J., et al. LongBench: A bilingual, multitask benchmark for long context understanding. In 

Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2024. Bouthillier, X., Delaunay, P., Bronzi, M., Trofimov, A., Nichyporuk, B., Szeto, J., Sepah, N. M., Raff, E., Madan, K., Voleti, V., Kahou, S. E., Michalski, V., Arbel, T., Pal, C., Varoquaux, G., and Vincent, P. Accounting for variance in machine learning benchmarks. In Conference on Machine Learning and Systems , 2021. Brandon, W., Mishra, M., Nrusimha, A., Panda, R., and Kelly, J. R. Reducing transformer key-value cache size with cross-layer attention, 2024. Cai, Z., Zhang, Y., Gao, B., Liu, Y., Li, Y., Liu, T., Lu, K., Xiong, W., Dong, Y., Hu, J., and Xiao, W. PyramidKV: Dynamic KV cache compression based on pyramidal information funneling, 2024. Cai, Z., Xiao, W., Sun, H., et al. R-KV: Redundancy-aware KV cache compression for reasoning models. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Cobbe, K., Kosaraju, V., Bavarian, M., Chen, M., Jun, H., Kaiser, L., Plappert, M., Tworek, J., Hilton, J., Nakano, R., Hesse, C., and Schulman, J. Training verifiers to solve math word problems, 2021. DeepSeek-AI. Deepseek-r1: Incentivizing reasoning capa-bility in llms via reinforcement learning, 2025. Dong, S., Cheng, W., Qin, J., and Wang, W. QAQ: Quality adaptive quantization for LLM KV cache, 2024. Dubey, A., Jauhri, A., Pandey, A., Kadian, A., Al-Dahle, A., Letman, A., et al. The Llama 3 herd of models, 2024. Feng, Y., Lv, J., Cao, Y., Xie, X., and Zhou, S. K. Ada-KV: Optimizing KV cache eviction by adaptive budget allocation for efficient LLM inference. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. Hendrycks, D., Burns, C., Kadavath, S., Arora, A., Basart, S., Tang, E., Song, D., and Steinhardt, J. Measuring mathematical problem solving with the MATH dataset. In NeurIPS Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2021. Hooper, C., Kim, S., Mohammadzadeh, H., Mahoney, M. W., Shao, Y. S., Keutzer, K., and Gholami, A. KVQuant: Towards 10 million context length LLM infer-ence with KV cache quantization. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Hsieh, C.-P., Sun, S., Kriman, S., Acharya, S., Rekesh, D., Jia, F., Zhang, Y., and Ginsburg, B. RULER: What’s the real context size of your long-context language models? In Conference on Language Modeling , 2024. Krause, A. and Golovin, D. Submodular function maxi-mization. In Tractability: Practical Approaches to Hard Problems , pp. 71–104. Cambridge University Press, 2014. Kulesza, A. and Taskar, B. Determinantal point processes for machine learning. Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning , 5(2–3):123–286, 2012. Li, X., Xing, Z., Li, Y., Qu, L., Zhen, H.-L., Liu, W., Yao, Y., Pan, S. J., and Yuan, M. KVTuner: Sensitivity-aware layer-wise mixed-precision KV cache quantization for efficient and nearly lossless LLM inference. In Interna-tional Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. Li, Y., Huang, Y., Yang, B., Venkitesh, B., Locatelli, A., Ye, H., Cai, T., Lewis, P., and Chen, D. SnapKV: LLM knows what you are looking for before generation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2024. Liu, Z., Desai, A., Liao, F., Wang, W., Xie, V., Xu, Z., Kyril-lidis, A., and Shrivastava, A. Scissorhands: Exploiting the persistence of importance hypothesis for LLM KV cache compression at test time. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. Liu, Z., Yuan, J., Jin, H., Zhong, S., Xu, Z., Braverman, V., Chen, B., and Hu, X. KIVI: A tuning-free asym-metric 2-bit quantization for KV cache. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Mao, W., Lin, X., Huang, W., et al. Triattention: Effi-cient long reasoning with trigonometric KV compression, 2026. Nemhauser, G. L., Wolsey, L. A., and Fisher, M. L. An analysis of approximations for maximizing submodular set functions—i. Mathematical Programming , 14(1):265– 294, 1978. Shao, Z., Wang, P., Zhu, Q., Xu, R., Song, J., Bi, X., Zhang, H., Zhang, M., Li, Y. K., Wu, Y., and Guo, D. DeepSeek-Math: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models, 2024. Sharma, A., Ding, H., Li, J., Dani, N., and Zhang, M. MiniKV: Pushing the limits of LLM inference via 2-bit layer-discriminative KV cache, 2024. 11 Minimal-Intervention KV Retention 

Tang, J., Zhao, Y., Zhu, K., Xiao, G., Kasikci, B., and Han, S. Quest: Query-aware sparsity for efficient long-context LLM inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Wang, X., Wei, J., Schuurmans, D., Le, Q. V., Chi, E. H., Narang, S., Chowdhery, A., and Zhou, D. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in lan-guage models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Ichter, B., Xia, F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., and Zhou, D. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 35, pp. 24824–24837, 2022. Xiao, G., Tian, Y., Chen, B., Han, S., and Lewis, M. Effi-cient streaming language models with attention sinks. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Yuan, Z., Shang, Y., Zhou, Y., Dong, Z., Zhou, Z., Xue, C., Wu, B., Li, Z., Gu, Q., Lee, Y. J., et al. ASVD: Activation-aware singular value decomposition for com-pressing large language models, 2024. Zhang, Z., Sheng, Y., Zhou, T., Chen, T., Zheng, L., Cai, R., Song, Z., Tian, Y., R ´e, C., Barrett, C., et al. H2O: Heavy-hitter oracle for efficient generative inference of large language models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, 2023. 12